AS MANY AS 40,000
AUSTRALIANS
DON'T HAVE STANDARD
SEX CHROMOSOMES.
THE SCIENTIFIC PRINCIPLE
USED FOR DECADES -
THAT ALL GIRLS
HAD XX CHROMOSOMES
AND ALL BOYS, XY
- ISN'T RELIABLE.
ARE WE JUST ON THE
CUSP OF LEARNING
WHAT DETERMINES GENDER?
WE REALLY ARE.
WE'RE JUST BEGINNING
TO UNDERSTAND THIS,
AND I THINK THE MORE WE
GO INTO IT, THE MORE
WE UNDERSTAND HOW COMPLEX
THIS WHOLE SITUATION IS.
IT'S A VERY COMPLEX
NETWORK OF GENES
THAT OPERATE IN
SPACE AND TIME.
CHRISTIE NORTH HAS
ALWAYS FELT FEMALE.
BUT WHEN SHE WAS 15 SHE
FOUND OUT SHE WAS BORN
WITH MALE CHROMOSOMES
AND INTERNAL TESTES.
THERE WAS NO MENTION
DURING SCHOOL,
DURING HUMAN DEVELOPMENT,
THAT THERE CAN BE
MIX-UPS WITH
YOUR CHROMOSOMES.
THE SCIENTIFIC WORLD IS ON
THE VERGE OF DISCOVERING
WHAT REALLY DETERMINES
GENDER, AND IN MANY CASES
HOW LITTLE IT HAS TO DO
WITH OUR ENVIRONMENT.
I JUST SORT OF GREW UP
WITH SCARRING AND THINGS
AND THINKING, "WELL,
OKAY, WHAT WAS THIS FOR?
WHY DID I HAVE THIS?
BUT I'M BEING TOLD
THESE PARTICULAR THINGS,
I'M BEING TOLD THAT FOR
THIS STAGE IN MY LIFE
I'M A BOY, THEREFORE
I MUST BE ONE".
WHY DID THEY
MAKE YOU A BOY?
UM, I HAVE NO IDEA.
I HAVE ABSOLUTELY NO
IDEA WHY THEY DID IT.
AUSTRALIAN LAW, TOO, IS
GRAPPLING WITH THE LATEST
SCIENCE ON WHAT IT MEANS
TO BE MALE OR FEMALE.
THE FEDERAL GOVERNMENT
TRIED TO PROVE THIS PERSON
WAS A WOMAN.
THE LAST THING YOU WANT
TO BE DOING IS TRYING TO
PROVE THAT YOU ARE THE
PERSON YOU ARE TO SOMEONE
THAT DOESN'T KNOW YOU,
SOMEONE THAT HAS NO IDEA
ABOUT YOUR LIFE, NEVER
INTERACTS WITH YOU AT ALL,
HAS NEVER MET YOU.
I KNOW WHAT A MAN IS, AND
I KNOW WHAT A HUSBAND IS,
AND I KNOW WHAT A FATHER IS
AND HE'S ALL OF THOSE THINGS.
TONIGHT ON FOUR CORNERS,
NEW AND CHALLENGING
SCIENCE ON THE
QUESTION OF GENDER.
WHAT MAKES A BOY AND
WHAT MAKES A GIRL?
IF WE RELIED ON THE COMMON
SCIENTIFIC DEFINITION OF
A MALE - THAT BEING SOMEONE
WITH XY CHROMOSOMES
- THEN CHRISTIE NORTH
WOULD BE A MAN.
AS AN UNBORN BABY SHE WAS
UNABLE TO PROCESS MALE
HORMONES SO SHE DEVELOPED
INSTEAD INTO A FEMALE.
THE MELBOURNE WOMAN HAS AN
INTERSEX CONDITION CALLED
"COMPLETE ANDROGEN
INSENSITIVITY SYNDROME".
THIS IS ONE OF MORE
THAN A DOZEN DIFFERENT
TYPES OF
INTERSEX CONDITIONS
AFFECTING THOUSANDS
OF AUSTRALIANS.
SO THERE WAS NOTHING THAT
MADE YOU ANY DIFFERENT
FROM ANY OF THE
OTHER GIRLS?
NO, NOT AT ALL.
EVEN WHEN I TOLD MY
FRIENDS - I ONLY TOLD
A FEW FRIENDS - BUT
THEY HAD NO IDEA.
MY WAY OF THINKING IS THAT
SHE WAS ALWAYS INTENDED TO
BE A GIRL BUT SHE JUST GOT
THERE BY A DIFFERENT PATH.
THAT, I THINK, IS A
FUNDAMENTALLY DIFFERENT
WAY OF THINKING.
INSTEAD OF THE NEGATIVE
WAY WHICH SAYS THIS IS A
BOY WHO DIDN'T MAKE IT,
THIS IS A GIRL WHO DID
MAKE IT AND WAS MEANT
TO MAKE IT THIS WAY,
BUT LIFE WAS JUST MEANT TO
BE ALSO A LITTLE DIFFERENT.
MANY OF THESE XY WOMEN
ARE TALL AND BEAUTIFUL.
THERE ARE RUMORS THAT
SOME ACTORS AND MODELS
HAVE THE CONDITION.
IT OFTEN PRODUCES WOMEN
WITH LITTLE BODY HAIR
AND CLEAR SKIN.
IT'S SOMETHING
THAT I HAVE.
IT'S NOT SOMETHING I THINK
ABOUT ON A DAILY BASIS.
I THINK ABOUT IT
OCCASIONALLY AND IF
I MENTION IT TO FRIENDS OR
A PROSPECTIVE BOYFRIEND
OR SOMETHING LIKE THAT,
THAT'S THE ONLY TIME
IT EVER GETS MENTIONED
OR BROUGHT UP.
WHAT HAS IT
MEANT FOR CHRISTIE
TO HAVE XY CHROMOSOMES?
OH, SHE'S HAPPY.
I THINK SHE'S HAPPY.
I DON'T THINK IT'S
WORRIED HER AT ALL.
SHE'S NEVER REALLY
COMPLAINED OR...
SHE'S JUST A NORMAL GIRL,
YOU KNOW, INTO THE HAIR,
COLORED HAIR,
MAKE-UP, YOU NAME IT.
SHE'S INTO THE
LATEST FASHIONS.
WHEN CHRISTIE NORTH
WAS TWO YEARS OLD,
SHE WENT INTO HOSPITAL
FOR A HERNIA OPERATION.
INTERNAL TESTES
WERE DISCOVERED
AND CHRISTIE WAS
LATER DIAGNOSED WITH
ANDROGEN INSENSITIVITY
SYNDROME.
SHE WAS BORN WITH TESTES
THAT ARE CAPABLE OF
MAKING THE MALE SEX
HORMONE, TESTOSTERONE.
HER BODY IS UNABLE TO
RESPOND IN ANY WAY TO THAT
HORMONE BECAUSE THE
RECEPTORS IN EVERY CELL IN
THE BODY FOR TESTOSTERONE
ARE ABSENT, AND THE REASON
FOR THAT IS A
GENETIC ALTERATION.
WHEN I WAS IN GRADE
SIX, PROFESSOR WARNE,
OR DR. WARNE THEN, SAT
ME DOWN WITH MY PARENTS
AND MY SISTER AND WE
DISCUSSED THAT I WAS
UNABLE TO HAVE KIDS
AND MENSTRUATE AND
THAT WAS PRETTY MUCH
ALL THAT WAS SAID THEN.
IT WASN'T UNTIL CHRISTIE
NORTH WAS 15 THAT SHE
WAS TOLD THAT SHE
HAD MALE CHROMOSOMES
AND WAS BORN WITH TESTES.
WOULD IT HAVE BEEN IN ANY
WAY EASIER FOR YOU IF YOU
HAD BEEN TOLD EVERYTHING
AT THE BEGINNING?
YEAH, IT WOULD'VE.
GROWING UP THINKING THAT
YOU HAD A HYSTERECTOMY
OR SOMETHING LIKE THAT
WHEN YOU WERE YOUNGER.
IT'S NOT THE CASE WHEN
YOU FIND OUT LATER ON,
SO IT WOULD HAVE
BEEN A LOT EASIER
IF YOU'D KNEW
STRAIGHT AWAY.
YOU ACTUALLY DIDN'T KNOW
WHY YOU WERE INFERTILE?
NO, NO.
EVERY YEAR CHRISTIE NORTH
RECEIVES AN IMPLANT OF THE
FEMALE HORMONE ESTROGEN
TO HELP FEMINIZE HER BODY.
THERE'S SO MANY PEOPLE
WITH THE SAME PROBLEM.
THERE'S MORE THAN WHAT
YOU THINK THERE IS.
WHEN YOU KNEW PEOPLE THAT
DIDN'T HAVE CHILDREN
YOU THINK, "OH, WHY DIDN'T
THEY HAVE CHILDREN?"
SO NOW WE KNOW WHY A
LOT OF OLDER PEOPLE
DIDN'T HAVE CHILDREN.
IT'S BECAUSE THEY
HAD THIS PROBLEM
AND IT WAS NEVER
SPOKEN ABOUT.
LIKE CHRISTIE, TENS OF
THOUSANDS OF AUSTRALIANS
DON'T HAVE STANDARD
SEX CHROMOSOMES.
AS WELL AS GIRLS
WITH XY CHROMOSOMES,
ONE IN 500 BOYS
ARE BORN WITH
A DOUBLE XX AS
WELL AS A Y.
MOST HAVE STANDARD
GENITALIA AND ARE UNAWARE
OF THEIR CHROMOSOMAL
MAKE-UP UNTIL THEY TRY TO
FATHER CHILDREN AND
DISCOVER THEY'RE INFERTILE.
SO WHAT DOES A SITUATION
LIKE YOURS, HAVING XY
CHROMOSOMES, SAY ABOUT
THE GENDER SPECTRUM?
WELL, IT'S NEVER ALL
ONE OR THE OTHER.
ONE IN 500 PEOPLE HAS
A CHROMOSOME VARIATION
OF SOME SORT.
SO IT'S NOT UNCOMMON.
MOST SCIENTISTS BELIEVE
WE'RE JUST ON THE VERGE
OF LEARNING WHAT MAKES
US MALE AND FEMALE,
AND THEY BELIEVE ONE WAY
TO BETTER UNDERSTAND THIS
IS THROUGH THE STUDY OF THOSE
ON THE GENDER EXTREMES.
I THINK THROUGHOUT HISTORY
HUMANS HAVE BEEN REALLY
INTERESTED IN WHAT
MAKES US MALE OR FEMALE,
AND UNDERLYING THAT IS
WHETHER OR NOT A TESTIS
OR AN OVARY DEVELOPS
IN THE EMBRYO.
UNTIL THE 1990'S, GENDER
WAS THOUGHT TO BE
LARGELY ABOUT
CHROMOSOMES.
BUT THIS PRINCIPLE
WAS CHALLENGED WHEN A
SCIENTIFIC BREAKTHROUGH
WAS MADE DURING THE STUDY
OF PEOPLE WITH
INTERSEX CONDITIONS.
A NEW GENE AND ITS IMPACT
ON THE DEVELOPMENT
OF MALE GENITALIA
WAS DISCOVERED.
A TEAM OF SCIENTISTS,
INCLUDING ASSOCIATE PROFESSOR
ANDREW SINCLAIR,
DISCOVERED SRY,
THE GENE NEEDED TO START
THE PROCESS OF 'MALENESS'.
THE RATIONALE FOR FINDING
THAT GENE WAS THAT WE
COULD UNRAVEL THE WHOLE
PROCESS AND UNDERSTAND
HOW YOU BUILD SOMETHING
AS COMPLEX AS A TESTIS,
AND BY KNOWING ALL THE
DIFFERENT COMPONENT PARTS
- A LITTLE BIT LIKE
PUTTING A CAR TOGETHER -
IF YOU KNOW ALL THE BITS,
WHEN SOMETHING GOES WRONG
YOU CAN PINPOINT THAT AND
CORRECT THAT IF NEED BE.
IT'S RECENTLY BEEN
DISCOVERED THAT THE
SRY GENE IS ALSO PRESENT
IN THE MALE BRAIN REGION
OF THE HYPOTHALAMUS,
THE SAME AREA WHERE
GENDER BRAIN IDENTITY
IS DEVELOPED.
WE'VE HAD SOME SUCCESS
IN UNDERSTANDING SRY
AND HOW IT
MAKES A TESTIS.
WE'RE NOW TRYING TO LOOK
AT WHAT SRY MIGHT BE DOING
IN THE BRAIN.
THERE IS SOME EVIDENCE
FROM OUR STUDIES
THAT THERE ARE GENES
ON THE Y CHROMOSOME,
WHICH MALES HAVE
AND FEMALES DON'T,
THAT MAKE AT LEAST
RATS MORE AGGRESSIVE;
AND SO IT COULD
BE THAT THERE ARE
MALE-SPECIFIC BEHAVIORS
THAT ARE CARRIED
BY GENES ON THE Y
CHROMOSOME, SUCH AS SRY.
ASSOCIATE PROFESSOR
VINCENT HARLEY
IS NOW LOOKING AT
A FURTHER 54 GENES
THAT HAVE BEEN
DISCOVERED SINCE SRY.
THESE GENES IN THE EMBRYO
ARE TURNED ON DIFFERENTLY
IN MALE AND FEMALE BRAINS
EVEN BEFORE THE ORGANS
THAT SECRETE
HORMONES HAVE FORMED.
THEY MAY HELP SCIENTISTS
TO EXPLAIN WHY SOME PEOPLE
IDENTIFY AS ONE
GENDER OR THE OTHER,
INDEPENDENTLY
OF CHROMOSOMES.
I THINK WE'RE STARTING TO
UNDERSTAND HOW THE BRAIN
IS HARD-WIRED DIFFERENTLY
BETWEEN MALES AND FEMALES.
OUR GENDER - HOW WE SEE
OURSELVES - IS DETERMINED
BY OUR BRAINS AS MUCH
AS ANYTHING ELSE.
SO IT'S QUITE LIKELY,
ONE COULD IMAGINE,
THAT THERE'LL BE
RECEPTORS IN THE BRAIN
WHICH WILL RESPOND TO
SOME OF THOSE HORMONES.
SO, IF THE GENE OR THOSE
RECEPTORS IN THE BRAIN
ARE NOT FUNCTIONING
AND NOT GOING TO RECEIVE
THE MALE HORMONE,
THEN THAT PERSON
MAY WELL HAVE A
FEMININE OUTLOOK.
SO THE BRAIN WILL
INFLUENCE GENDER
AS MUCH AS THE GONADS.
SCIENCE IS STARTING TO
REDEFINE THE GENDER DEBATE.
FOR YEARS IT WAS THOUGHT
TO BE ALL ABOUT NURTURE -
THE WAY A CHILD
WAS RAISED.
FEMINIST THEORY
HELPED THE IDEA ALONG.
WOMEN LIMITED THEMSELVES
BECAUSE THEY'D BEEN
STEREOTYPED AND
SOCIALIZED THAT WAY.
IT'S A REALITY OF TWISTED
AND THWARTED PEOPLE,
PEOPLE WHO ARE
TWISTED AND THWARTED
'CAUSE THEY'RE PUSHED
INTO ROLES.
GIRLS TRAIN THEMSELVES
FOR THEIR FUTURE.
THEY TAKE THEIR
DOLLS TO THE PARK...
MOST OF THE
THEORIES OF THE TIME
SPOKE ABOUT SOCIALIZATION,
SPOKE ABOUT THE WAY
PARENTS TRAIN US INTO
PARTICULAR GENDER ROLES,
AND THAT WAS THE
PREVAILING MODEL.
IN THE '60'S AND '70'S
DOCTORS BELIEVED THE POWER
OF NURTURE WAS SO STRONG
IT COULD BE APPLIED
TO CHILDREN WHERE THEIR
SEX WAS AMBIGUOUS.
THE PRACTICE WAS TO ASSIGN
A BABY WHO OFTEN HAD
BOTH MALE AND FEMALE
GENITALIA A GENDER.
THE CHILD WOULD THEN
UNDERGO GENITAL SURGERY
AND BE RAISED IN
ITS ASSIGNED SEX.
THE THEORY WAS THE CHILD
WOULD GROW UP HAPPY
AND WELL ADJUSTED.
THIS PHILOSOPHY WAS
BASED ON THE WORK OF
A FAMOUS NEW ZEALAND
PSYCHIATRIST, JOHN MONEY.
UNFORTUNATELY HE WAS VERY
POWERFUL AND INFLUENTIAL
AT THE TIME AND PEOPLE
TOOK THIS THEORY AS GOSPEL.
AND WHAT DO YOU THINK
OF THAT THEORY NOW?
WELL, I THINK A TOTAL
RELIANCE ON NURTURE
AS FAR AS DETERMINING
SEX IS COMPLETE RUBBISH.
I THINK IT JUST
DOESN'T HAPPEN.
ANDIE HIDER IS AN
EXAMPLE OF THE FAILURE
OF JOHN MONEY'S
NURTURE THEORY.
SHE WAS BORN WITH AMBIGUOUS,
OR ATYPICAL, GENITALIA.
DOCTORS DIDN'T KNOW
WHAT SEX SHE WAS,
SO THEY TOOK A PUNT AND
DECIDED SHE'D BE A BOY.
I GUESS WE'D BEEN BROUGHT
UP IN THAT GENERATION
TO THINK THAT DOCTORS
WERE SOMEWHAT GOD-LIKE.
IF YOU WERE TOLD
SOMETHING, YOU BELIEVED IT.
ANDREW HIDER WAS A QUIET,
GENTLE LITTLE BOY
WHO ALWAYS FELT NOT
QUITE RIGHT ABOUT
HIS PLACE IN THE WORLD
AND DIDN'T KNOW WHY.
HE WAS CERTAINLY
NOT A TYPICAL BOY,
NOT OUT KICKING FOOTBALLS
AND ROUGH-HOUSING.
HE WAS GREAT AT FIDDLING
AROUND MAKING THINGS,
CREATING THINGS - VERY GOOD
WITH HIS HANDS ALWAYS.
ANDIE WAS NEVER REALLY
TERRIBLY MALE OR FEMALE,
ALWAYS SLIGHTLY AMBIGUOUS.
I GUESS LOOKING BACK,
I THINK ANDIE PROBABLY
HAD A REALLY
DIFFICULT CHILDHOOD.
ANDIE HIDER DID A LOT OF
THE THINGS THAT MEN DO.
SHE WAS INTO CARS
AND MECHANICS.
BUT, DESPITE THE
MASCULINE PURSUITS,
PEOPLE OFTEN MISTOOK
ANDIE FOR FEMALE.
AS A MAN, SHE STARTED
TO QUESTION HER GENDER.
I SORT OF THOUGHT,
WELL, IF I'M NOT MALE,
THEN I MUST BE
SOMETHING ELSE,
AND THE ONLY OTHER
THING IS FEMALE.
SO, FOR ME, THAT WAS THE
THING THAT MADE ME REALIZE,
"WELL, THAT'S
PROBABLY WHO I AM".
ANDIE HIDER DECIDED TO
DO SOMETHING ABOUT IT.
SHE APPLIED FOR HER
MEDICAL RECORDS
UNDER THE FREEDOM
OF INFORMATION ACT.
WHAT SHE FOUND
SHOCKED HER.
SHE WAS BORN WITH A RARE BUT
EXTREME INTERSEX CONDITION
- PARTIAL ANDROGEN
INSENSITIVITY SYNDROME.
ANDIE HIDER HAS MALE
CHROMOSOMES BUT HER BODY
COULDN'T PROCESS ENOUGH
MASCULINE HORMONES,
LEAVING HER WITH MANY
FEMININE ATTRIBUTES
AND AMBIGUOUS OR
ATYPICAL GENITALIA.
THEY OBVIOUSLY KNEW AT
THE TIME WHAT THEY WERE
DEALING WITH, BUT THEY
DIDN'T TELL MY PARENTS
BECAUSE IT WASN'T
THE CULTURE TO DO SO.
YOUR PARENTS
HAD NO IDEA?
NO.
I WAS OUTRAGED, I
SUPPOSE, THAT IN
COMPARATIVELY MODERN
TIMES ANYBODY WOULD
MAKE DECISIONS ABOUT
MY CHILD AND, YOU KNOW,
HER FUTURE WITHOUT EVEN
TELLING ME ABOUT IT.
IT WOULD HAVE BEEN AFTER
I GOT MY MEDICAL RECORDS,
WHEN I WAS ABOUT
30 YEARS OLD,
AND WENT AND
TOLD MY MOTHER.
I KNOW NOW THAT THIS
WAS ACCEPTED PRACTICE
THAT YOU DON'T TELL
PEOPLE ABOUT THIS.
IT'S, YOU KNOW, SOMETHING
THAT MUST BE KEPT QUIET
AND OUT OF SIGHT AND
OUT OF MIND, BUT...
SO ANDIE'S CASE
WASN'T A ONE-OFF?
OH, NO. NO, NO.
ANDIE HIDER, A FEDERAL
POLICE OFFICER,
TURNED HER
ANGER INTO ACTION.
IN HER SPARE TIME SHE
BECAME AN ADVOCATE
FOR PEOPLE WITH
INTERSEX CONDITIONS.
ANDIE SAYS THE CULTURE HAS
BEEN NOT TO TELL PARENTS,
AND PARTICULARLY CHILDREN,
OF THEIR CONDITIONS.
SHE WANTS THAT CHANGED
AND IS CALLING FOR
FULL MEDICAL
DISCLOSURE.
ANDIE HIDER CLAIMS NO
AMOUNT OF NURTURE WILL
MAKE SOMEONE A BOY OR A
GIRL IF THEY AREN'T ONE.
WHAT I HAVE AN ISSUE WITH
NOW IS THE FACT THAT THE
MEDICAL PROFESSION SHOULD
HAVE LEARNED FROM STORIES
LIKE MINE AND FROM
STORIES OF OTHER PEOPLE
AND SAID, "WELL,
HANG ON, THIS ISN'T
NECESSARILY WORKING,
AND THERE ARE OPTIONS.
THERE ARE OTHER WAYS
OF TREATING THIS."
AND THE MEDICAL PROFESSION
HAVEN'T LEARNED?
I DON'T THINK THEY HAVE,
TO BE PERFECTLY HONEST.
I THINK ANDIE'S LIFE WOULD
HAVE BEEN A LOT EASIER
IF SHE HAD KNOWN
FROM THE OUTSET THAT,
"YOU HAVE A CHOICE
HERE", YOU KNOW,
"YOU ARE THIS TYPE OF PERSON
- NOT MALE, NOT FEMALE -
YOU FIND OUT
FOR YOURSELF",
RATHER THAN HAVING
SOMETHING IMPOSED ON YOU
THAT MAY NOT BE
THE RIGHT THING.
PROFESSOR GARRY WARNE
IS AN ENDOCRINOLOGIST
WHO'S BEEN WORKING
WITH INTERSEX CHILDREN
FOR ALMOST 30 YEARS.
THE MEDICAL PROFESSION
FELT THEY WERE IN A
PRIVILEGED POSITION OF
HAVING THE INFORMATION
AND THAT THE PATIENTS
DIDN'T NEED TO BE BOTHERED
BY SOME OF THOSE
PAINFUL FACTS.
HE DID ACTUALLY START THE
MOVEMENT TO TELL THE TRUTH.
A LOT OF DOCTORS SAID,
"YOU CAN'T DO THAT.
YOU KNOW, "WHAT GIVES YOU
THE RIGHT TO TURN AROUND
AND RUIN THESE
PEOPLE'S LIVES?"
AND, AS HE SAID, "IT'S
NOT RUINING THEIR LIVES".
AND HE WAS QUITE RIGHT.
IN 2002 GARRY WARNE
WAS MADE AN HONORARY
LIFE MEMBER OF THE
ANDROGEN INSENSITIVITY
SUPPORT GROUP FOR
HIS EFFORTS TO HAVE
INTERSEX CONDITIONS
DISCLOSED.
BUT HE IS A
CONTROVERSIAL FIGURE.
LIKE JOHN MONEY BEFORE
HIM, HE STILL BELIEVES
IN SURGICALLY ASSIGNING
A GENDER TO BABIES
WITH AMBIGUOUS OR
ATYPICAL GENITALIA.
HE BELIEVES FAILURE TO DO
THIS COULD DAMAGE THE CHILD.
I THINK THAT IT EXPOSES
THE CHILD TO THE
POSSIBILITY OF RIDICULE
AND EMBARRASSMENT.
IT'S SOMETHING THAT
WOULD MAKE THEM FEEL
VERY DIFFERENT FROM
OTHER CHILDREN.
NOW IT'S JUST LUDICROUS
TO TURN AROUND AND SAY,
"WELL, LET'S TRY
AND ALLEVIATE SOME
SOCIAL EMBARRASSMENT
BY SURGICALLY ALTERING
A CHILD AT THAT
STAGE OF THEIR LIFE.
MANY DOCTORS AND
ADVOCATES BELIEVE
IT'S WRONG TO SURGICALLY
CHANGE GENITALIA
UNTIL A CHILD
CAN HAVE ITS SAY.
BUT PROFESSOR WARNE SAYS
HIS POLICY, WHEN IN DOUBT,
IS TO MAKE
A CHILD A BOY.
IT PROVIDES MORE CHOICE.
IT GIVES THE PERSON
THE GREATEST OPTION
WHEN THEY GROW UP.
THEY CAN EASILY REVERSE
THAT AND GO BACK
TO FEMALE IF THEY WISH,
BUT IT'S VERY HARD
TO GO THE OTHER WAY.
SO PRESERVING OPTIONS I
THINK IS WHAT IT'S ALL ABOUT.
IT'S A VERY DIFFICULT
CLINICAL SITUATION
TO BE FACED WITH.
IT'S A VERY DIFFICULT
ASSESSMENT TO MAKE, AND,
AS I SAID, THE CURRENT
PARADIGM WOULD BE TO WAIT
AND SEE AS MUCH AS
POSSIBLE, WHEREAS THE OLD
PARADIGM WOULD HAVE BEEN
TO INTERVENE, SURGICALLY
RE-ASSIGN AND TO RAISE
THE CHILD UNAMBIGUOUSLY.
SOME INTERNATIONAL
STUDIES
CHALLENGE PROFESSOR
WARNE'S VIEW.
IN THE US, 94 PEOPLE WITH
AN INTERSEX CONDITION
WHO HAD ATYPICAL
GENITALIA WERE SURVEYED.
MORE THAN HALF WERE
UNHAPPY WITH THE SEX
THEY'D BEEN ASSIGNED.
DESPITE BEING RAISED
AS GIRLS AND HAVING
GENITAL SURGERY,
THEY BECAME BOYS.
IT'S A HOT POINT, BUT WE'VE
ALSO RECENTLY COMPLETED
OUR LONG-TERM FOLLOW-UP
STUDY AT THIS HOSPITAL
AND WE GOT IT RIGHT
96% OF THE TIME.
IN OUR SERIES THERE
WERE ONLY TWO OUT OF 50
WHO WANTED TO BE
THE OTHER SEX.
SO WHAT IS THE AIS SUPPORT
GROUP GOING ON ABOUT WHEN
THEY SAY HOW BADLY THEY'VE
BEEN TREATED BY DOCTORS
AND HOW UNHAPPY PEOPLE
ARE WITH SURGERY?
WHERE ARE THEY
COMING FROM?
WELL, I THINK THAT
THEY'RE, UNFORTUNATELY,
A GROUP OF PEOPLE WHO
HAVE HAD BAD EXPERIENCES
AND WHO FEEL EMPOWERED
BY BELONGING TO A GROUP
AND MAKING THEIR
PRESENCE KNOWN.
WHY DOESN'T THEIR BAD
EXPERIENCES, THEN,
CORRELATE WITH
YOUR STUDY?
I THINK THAT'S BECAUSE THE
PEOPLE THAT HAVE HAD GOOD
EXPERIENCES DON'T BOTHER
JOINING SUCH GROUPS.
WE'RE NOT A GROUP
OF MALCONTENTS.
WE'RE NOT A GROUP OF
PEOPLE WHO GET TOGETHER
AND GRIND AXES
ABOUT DOCTORS.
THERE HAVE BEEN
SOME GOOD DOCTORS.
WE GIVE AWARDS TO DOCTORS
WHO ARE FORWARD THINKING,
WHO DO CHANGE THINGS.
THERE IS A NUCLEUS IN
THE HYPOTHALAMUS THAT IS
DIFFERENTLY SIZED
IN MALE AND FEMALES.
ANDIE HIDER'S STORY
FOCUSES ATTENTION
ON WHAT CAN HAPPEN WHEN
CHROMOSOMES DON'T MATCH
GENDER IDENTITY.
TO BETTER UNDERSTAND
THE BIOLOGY OF GENDER,
SCIENTISTS ARE
RESEARCHING ANOTHER GROUP
ON THE GENDER EXTREME
- TRANSSEXUALS.
THEY HAVE THE BODY TO
MATCH THEIR CHROMOSOMES
BUT BELIEVE THEIR BRAIN
HAS BEEN HARD-WIRED
TO GO IN THE
OPPOSITE DIRECTION.
PEOPLE, SINCE THE DAWN OF
HUMANITY, HAVE WONDERED
WHY WE FEEL THE SEX WE
FEEL AND I THINK NATURE
HAS KIND OF THROWN UP
THESE VARIATIONS WHICH ARE
WONDERFUL AND WE SHOULD
CELEBRATE THESE VARIATIONS
IN GENDER IDENTITY.
WHY SHOULD WE
CELEBRATE THEM?
BECAUSE I THINK IT TELLS
US A LOT ABOUT HOW WE
- HOW YOU AND I -
PERCEIVE OURSELVES
AS THE SEX WE ARE.
HERE IN FEMALES IT'S
ABOUT HALF THE SIZE...
TRANSSEXUALS ARE
PARTICULARLY INTERESTING
TO SCIENTISTS WHO WANT
TO MAP OUT THE PATTERN
OF HUMAN SEXUAL
DEVELOPMENT.
THEY PROVIDE A UNIQUE
SAMPLE THAT ANIMAL STUDIES
CAN'T REPLICATE.
THERE IS A SMALL BUT
GROWING BODY OF EVIDENCE
THAT TRANSSEXUAL BRAINS
ARE HARD-WIRED IN UTERO
TO BE EITHER
MALE OR FEMALE.
PROFESSOR HARLEY HOPES
TO PROVE IN HIS STUDY
THAT BRAIN SEX
IS RESPONSIBLE
FOR THE TRANSSEXUAL
CONDITION.
I THINK THERE MIGHT BE A
PUBLIC PERCEPTION THAT,
YOU KNOW, TRANSSEXUALISM
IS A LIFESTYLE CHOICE,
AND I THINK TO REAFFIRM
A BIOLOGICAL BASIS
WOULD BE QUITE
EMPOWERING FOR THEM.
PROFESSOR HARLEY IS
RESEARCHING A VARIANCE
IN THE SEQUENCE OF GENES
THOUGHT TO BE FOUND
IN MALE-TO-FEMALE
TRANSSEXUALS.
HE IS STUDYING THE
DNA OF 50 PEOPLE.
HIS WORK MAY ALSO
HELP TO EXPLAIN WHY,
AS MALES OR FEMALES, WE
BEHAVE THE WAY WE DO.
WELL, I THINK ULTIMATELY
IT WOULD BE GREAT
TO FIND GENDER IDENTITY
GENES, AND IT MIGHT BE
THROUGH THE STUDIES
OF TRANSSEXUALS
THAT WE'LL GET
TO THOSE GENES.
IN FACT, I THINK
IT'S THE ONLY WAY
WE'RE GOING TO GET
TO THOSE GENES.
THE THEORY OF BRAIN SEX
IS NOT ONLY CHALLENGING
FOR SCIENCE BUT
ALSO FOR THE LAW.
IT WAS RELIED ON FOR THE
FIRST TIME IN AUSTRALIA
IN A LANDMARK CASE
IN THE FAMILY COURT.
"KEVIN", A TRANSSEXUAL,
WANTED TO MARRY
HIS PARTNER, "JENNIFER".
THE FEDERAL
ATTORNEY-GENERAL'S
DEPARTMENT OPPOSED THE
MARRIAGE, ARGUING THAT
KEVIN, IN THE EYES OF
THE LAW, WAS FEMALE.
TO BE A MAN, KEVIN MUST
HAVE BEEN BORN WITH
MALE CHROMOSOMES,
GENITALS AND GONADS.
BUT, INSTEAD, HE WAS BORN
INTO THE BODY OF A FEMALE.
WHY DID YOU DECIDE
TO GET MARRIED?
WELL, I'M A BIT
OF A TRADITIONALIST,
FIRST OF ALL, AND I REALLY
WANTED TO MARRY JENNIFER.
BUT THE ABSOLUTE CRUNCH
OF THE MATTER WAS
TO PROVIDE SECURITY FOR
HER AND ANY CHILDREN
WE CHOSE TO
HAVE LATER.
THE FAMILY COURT FORBIDS
THE IDENTIFICATION
OF PARTIES TO
ITS PROCEEDINGS.
FOR THE PURPOSE OF A
COURT CASE, THE COUPLE
WERE KNOWN AS "KEVIN"
AND "JENNIFER".
THIS IS THE FIRST
TIME THEY'VE EVER
SPOKEN PUBLICLY.
THEY HAVE BEEN
DISGUISED.
I REMEMBER GOING TO
BED NIGHT AFTER NIGHT
WISHING THAT WHEN I
WAKE UP THAT I'D BE LIKE
ALL THE OTHER BOYS INSTEAD
OF BEING DIFFERENT.
FOR AS LONG AS
KEVIN CAN REMEMBER
HE PERCEIVED
HIMSELF TO BE MALE.
WHEN HE WAS VERY YOUNG,
HIS MOTHER TRIED TO
PERSUADE HIM
HE WAS A GIRL.
SHE HAD HER HUSBAND
AND CHILD STAND NAKED
IN FRONT OF EACH OTHER.
I JUST CONTINUED TO
SAY, "I'M A LITTLE BOY".
SHE KEPT SAYING,
"YOU'RE NOT".
AND I THINK OUT OF
DESPERATION SHE EVENTUALLY
MADE ME STAND IN FRONT OF
MY FATHER, WHO WAS NAKED,
AND SAID TO ME, "LOOK,
YOU DON'T LOOK LIKE
YOUR FATHER;
YOU'RE NOT A BOY".
AND I SAID,
"BUT I AM".
KEVIN WAS THE OLDEST
OF FOUR CHILDREN.
HE HAD THREE SISTERS.
HIS ADOLESCENCE
WAS TRAUMATIC.
AT SCHOOL HE WAS HARASSED
FOR WEARING BOYS' CLOTHES.
HE HAD TO LEARN HOW TO
FIGHT TO PROTECT HIMSELF.
SO KIDS USED TO TEASE ME
AND HARASS ME CONSTANTLY:
"YOU'RE A GIRL,
YOU'RE NOT A BOY."
"WHY DO YOU
DRESS LIKE THAT?"
LOOK LIKE THAT?"
"WHY DO YOU PLAY SOCCER
AND FOOTBALL AND CRICKET?"
"WHY CAN'T YOU BE
LIKE THE REST OF US?"
AND I'D JUST SAY,
"I'M NOT LIKE YOU.
I'M NOT LIKE YOU.
I CAN'T BE YOU.
I'M BEING MYSELF."
THEN PUBERTY KICKED IN.
HE STARTED TO DEVELOP
BREASTS AND MENSTRUATE.
OH, IT WAS DREADFUL.
IT WAS ABSOLUTELY
DREADFUL.
YOU KNOW, IT WAS LIKE
MY WORST NIGHTMARE.
HOW COULD THIS
BE HAPPENING?
SOMETHING'S WRONG.
YOU KNOW, EVERYONE
KEPT TELLING ME,
"YOU'RE A GIRL,
YOU'RE A GIRL".
AND NOW MY BODY'S TELLING
ME I'M A GIRL WHEN I'M NOT.
LIKE THIS IS
UNBELIEVABLE.
HOW COULD THIS
BE HAPPENING?
TEN YEARS AGO, AT 29,
KEVIN HEARD FOR THE
FIRST TIME ABOUT GENDER
RE-ASSIGNMENT SURGERY.
WHERE WOULD YOU BE NOW IF
YOU HADN'T HAD SURGERY?
CERTAINLY NOT HERE.
CERTAINLY NOT HERE TODAY,
CERTAINLY NOT
HAVING THE LIFE...
WITHOUT A DOUBT,
I WOULD BE DEAD.
I WAS GETTING TO THE POINT
WHERE IT WAS BECOMING
MORE AND MORE DIFFICULT
TO GET UP OUT OF BED
EVERY DAY AND PUT
ON THIS FACADE.
WHAT WOULD YOU SAY TO
PEOPLE WHO SAY, LOOK,
PEOPLE LIKE YOU SHOULD
JUST GET SOME THERAPY AND
BE CONTENT IN THE BODY
THAT YOU WERE BORN WITH?
THAT'S THE BIGGEST
JOKE OF ALL.
THEY HAVE NO
UNDERSTANDING OF
THE CONCEPT OF
TRANSSEXUALISM.
THEY HAVE NO UNDERSTANDING
OF WHAT IT'S LIKE TO HAVE
A MIND THAT'S NOT IN
SYNC WITH YOUR BODY.
THEY HAVE NO IDEA AT ALL.
AND I SAID, "YOU KNOW,
COME AND WALK IN MY SHOES
FOR A DAY AND SEE
WHAT IT'S LIKE".
KEVIN STARTED HORMONE
TREATMENT THAT LED TO
HAIR GROWTH ON HIS
FACE, CHEST AND LEGS.
TWO YEARS LATER HE
HAD CHEST SURGERY
FOLLOWED BY A
HYSTERECTOMY.
WHAT ABOUT WHEN YOU FOUND
OUT ABOUT KEVIN'S HISTORY?
DID THAT MAKE ANY
DIFFERENCE TO YOU AT ALL?
NO, EXCEPT TO SAY THAT
IT PROBABLY MADE ME
ADMIRE HIM MORE, CERTAINLY
NOT LESS, BECAUSE
I COULD SEE WHAT A HUGE
JOURNEY HE'D BEEN ON.
I TOLD HER ON OUR SECOND
DATE, AND SHE WAS JUST
INCREDIBLE, SUPPORTIVE,
UNDERSTANDING, CARING AND
- WELL, HISTORY TELLS US
SHE CHOSE TO COME ALONG
ON THE JOURNEY BECAUSE
OF ME, WHO I AM,
NOT ABOUT MY GENDER.
I HAD NEVER HAD ANY SENSE
OF HIM OTHER THAN THAT
HE WAS COMPLETELY MALE.
HIS STORY ABOUT
HIS TRANSSEXUALISM
MADE NO DIFFERENCE.
JENNIFER AND KEVIN STARTED
LIVING TOGETHER AND NOT
LONG AFTER DECIDED THEY
WANTED TO START A FAMILY.
BECAUSE KEVIN WAS
AN INFERTILE MALE,
THE COUPLE APPLIED TO
JOIN AN IVF PROGRAM
AND USE DONOR SPERM.
I DO THINK IT WAS
SIGNIFICANT THAT IT WAS
A PUBLIC HOSPITAL CLINIC
WHICH ACCEPTED US
ONTO THEIR
FERTILITY PROGRAM.
WE WERE THE FIRST SUCH
COUPLE THAT THEY HAD
ACCEPTED ONTO THEIR
PROGRAM EVER, AND SO
THEY NEEDED TO DISCUSS
THE ETHICS OF IT.
AFTER JENNIFER CONCEIVED
WITH THEIR FIRST CHILD,
THE COUPLE DECIDED
THEY SHOULD MARRY.
JENNIFER WROTE TO THE
FEDERAL ATTORNEY-GENERAL
ASKING IF THAT
WAS POSSIBLE.
WE WROTE MORE LETTERS
EXPLAINING THOROUGHLY
ALL ABOUT IT, THE
FACT THAT MY HUSBAND
HAD UNDERGONE THE
PROCESS OF TRANSITION.
HE'D TAKEN ALL OF THE
AVAILABLE MEDICAL STEPS.
HE'D MADE ALL OF THE
SOCIAL ADJUSTMENTS.
HE'D MADE THE OTHER
LEGAL CHANGES
IN TERMS OF
DOCUMENTATION.
HE HAD A MALE
BIRTH CERTIFICATE,
A MALE PASSPORT ET
CETERA, AND EVERYBODY
WHOSE PATH HE CROSSED
REGARDED HIM AS MALE,
FROM THE PEOPLE CLOSEST TO
HIM SUCH AS HIS PARTNER,
YOU KNOW, I MIGHT SAY,
OUR EXTENDED FAMILY,
THE PEOPLE HE WORKED
WITH AND ANYBODY
THAT PASSED HIM IN
THE STREET, YOU KNOW.
JENNIFER AND KEVIN
RECEIVED AN EMAIL
BACK FROM AN OFFICER
IN THE FEDERAL
ATTORNEY-GENERAL'S
DEPARTMENT.
IT WARNED IF THEY WENT
AHEAD AND GOT MARRIED
KEVIN WAS LIABLE FOR
A PENALTY OF UP TO
TWO YEARS JAIL.
THE PUBLIC SERVANT ALSO
PREDICTED IF THE COUPLE
TOOK IT TO COURT
THEY WOULD LOSE;
AND SHE SUGGESTED THE
LAW PERHAPS WOULD CHANGE
ONE DAY BUT NOT IN
HER WORKING LIFE.
SHE CONCLUDED
WITH THIS:
"BELIEVE ME, AS A
MARRIED MOTHER OF FOUR,
MARRIAGE IS NOT ALL
IT'S CRACKED UP TO BE."
I FELT VERY SHOCKED
WHEN I READ THAT.
I WAS ACTUALLY PHYSICALLY
SHAKING WHEN I READ IT.
THE WOMAN THAT WROTE
THE LETTER, WHO WAS IN
QUITE A RESPONSIBLE
POSITION IN THE DEPARTMENT
ANSWERING MATTERS OF
FAMILY LAW AND SO ON,
JUST MADE NO ATTEMPT TO
VEIL HER PERSONAL BIAS.
SO THIS PUBLIC SERVANT
OFFERED A WHOLE LOT OF
PERSONAL COMMENTS?
OH, DEFINITELY,
OF WHICH I FOUND
EXTREMELY OFFENSIVE TO
ME AS AN INDIVIDUAL,
TO JENNIFER AND
MYSELF AS A COUPLE.
IT WAS JUST OUTRAGEOUS.
THE COUPLE DECIDED TO
MARRY DESPITE THE EMAIL,
PREFERRING INSTEAD TO
HAVE THE VALIDITY OF
THEIR MARRIAGE TESTED
IN THE FAMILY COURT.
THEY HIRED LAWYER
RACHAEL WALLBANK,
HERSELF A TRANSSEXUAL AND
EXPERT ON THE CONDITION.
RACHAEL WALLBANK DECIDED
TO FIGHT THE CASE AGAINST
THE ATTORNEY-GENERAL'S
DEPARTMENT
ON THE BASIS
OF SCIENCE.
WE WERE ABLE TO TAKE THE
COURT THROUGH A JOURNEY,
REALLY, A SCIENTIFIC
JOURNEY THAT FIRSTLY DEALT
WITH THE KIND OF DIVERSITY
IN HUMAN SEXUAL FORMATION
ARISING FROM CHROMOSOMAL
DIVERSITY AS WELL AS
BODILY FORMATION DIVERSITY,
TO THE POINT WHERE
WE COULD DEAL WITH
EVIDENCE CONCERNING
BRAIN SEX DIFFERENTIATION
IN THE HUMAN BEING.
THE COURT WAS PRESENTED
WITH SEVERAL SCIENTIFIC
STUDIES SUGGESTING
A BIOLOGICAL BASIS
TO TRANSSEXUALISM.
A DUTCH STUDY LOOKING
AT THE HYPOTHALAMUS
OF SIX MALE-TO-FEMALE
TRANSSEXUALS FOUND
THEY HAD SIMILAR FEATURES
TO FEMALE BRAINS.
THEY EXAMINED THE PART OF
THE BRAIN ESSENTIAL FOR
SEXUAL BEHAVIOR AND FOUND
IT WAS THE SAME SIZE
IN FEMALE TRANSSEXUALS
AS IT WAS IN OTHER WOMEN.
IN MEN, THIS REGION OF
THE BRAIN KNOWN AS THE
BED NUCLEUS OF THE STRIA
TERMINALIS IS MUCH LARGER.
THE STUDY SUGGESTED THAT
GENDER IDENTITY DEVELOPS
AS A RESULT OF AN
INTERACTION BETWEEN
THE DEVELOPING BRAIN
AND SEX HORMONES.
OTHER STUDIES
SUPPORTED THIS THEORY.
IN VIEW OF ALL THE
EVIDENCE THAT I HAD,
THERE'S JUST NO
REASON TO SEE HOW
IT COULD POSSIBLY
HAVE BEEN NURTURE.
THE THINGS THAT
CHARACTERIZE TRANSSEXUALS
ARE AS MUCH
BIOLOGICAL AS MENTAL
AND THAT'S TERRIBLY
IMPORTANT FOR THE LAW.
SO THE POINT I WAS TRYING
TO MAKE IN THE JUDGMENT
IS THAT THE
BRAIN SEX THEORY,
THE BIOLOGICAL-BASED
THEORY, DOESN'T SEEM
TO HAVE ANY COMPETITORS
IN TERMS OF EXPLANATION.
NOBODY ELSE IS SAYING,
"OH, THERE'S THIS OTHER
PLAUSIBLE EXPLANATION".
IN HIS JUDGMENT JUSTICE
CHISHOLM SAID, "IT WOULD
BE WRONG TO SUGGEST THAT
A PERSON'S SEX DEPENDS ON
ANY SINGLE FACTOR SUCH AS
CHROMOSOMES OR GENITALIA."
"EQUALLY", HE SAID, "IT
WOULD BE WRONG TO SAY
IT CAN BE DETERMINED
SOLELY BY A PERSON'S
PSYCHOLOGICAL STATE
OR THEIR BRAIN SEX."
IT'S NOT A PREFERENCE BUT
IT'S A SENSE OF WHO THEY ARE
THAT FOR THEM SEEMS TO
BE SO FUNDAMENTAL THAT
IT'S NOT AN OPINION AND
THAT IT COULDN'T BE CHANGED.
IT'S JUST AN ABSOLUTE
SENSE, LIKE A SENSE
PERHAPS THAT LIFE'S
WORTH LIVING OR THAT
ONE IS ALIVE OR THAT
YOU'RE SITTING ON A CHAIR.
JUSTICE CHISHOLM ALSO
CONSIDERED KEVIN'S
SOCIAL STANDING, THE FACT
HE'D HAD GENDER SURGERY
AND HIS SUCCESS IN BEING
TREATED AS AN INFERTILE MAN
IN A SYDNEY HOSPITAL'S
IVF PROGRAM.
JUSTICE CHISHOLM
DETERMINED THAT KEVIN
AT THE TIME OF HIS
MARRIAGE WAS A MAN
AND THEREFORE THE
MARRIAGE WAS LEGAL.
HE SAID IN HIS JUDGMENT:
IT'S DIFFICULT TO IMAGINE
HOW THERE COULD BE
A STRONGER CASE ON
THE FACTS FOR A PERSON
WITH FEMALE CHROMOSOMES,
BORN WITH FEMALE GENITALIA
AND CHROMOSOMES, TO
BE TREATED AS A MAN.
I REFER TO THE EXTENSIVE
EVIDENCE RELATING TO
HIS SELF-PERCEPTION,
APPEARANCE,
MEDICAL HISTORY AND
FUNCTIONING IN SOCIETY.
THE ATTORNEY-GENERAL'S
DEPARTMENT APPEALED
JUSTICE CHISHOLM'S
DECISION, AND THE CASE
WENT TO THE FULL BENCH
OF THE FAMILY COURT.
IT ALSO DECIDED
IN KEVIN'S FAVOR.
KEVIN AND JENNIFER ARE
NOW HAPPILY MARRIED,
LIVING WITH THEIR TWO
CHILDREN IN SUBURBAN SYDNEY.
THAT'S ALL WE WANT
IS TO BLEND IN
AND GET ON
WITH OUR LIVES.
WE DON'T WANT TO
GO OUT SAYING,
"HEY, WE'RE DIFFERENT.
HEY, LOOK AT US."
"HEY, TREAT US WITH
A SPECIAL KIND OF..."
I DON'T KNOW WHAT.
WE'RE JUST LIKE
EVERYONE ELSE.
WE JUST - WE WORK.
WE PAY OUR TAXES.
WE CARE FOR OUR FAMILY.
WHAT MORE DO YOU WANT?
FAR MORE CONTROVERSIAL
THAN ADULTS CHANGING GENDER
IS THE ISSUE OF
ADOLESCENTS WANTING TO.
CHILDREN SEEKING MEDICAL
TREATMENT MUST GO THROUGH
THE FAMILY COURT.
THIS FOLLOWS A
CONTROVERSIAL CASE
LAST YEAR IN MELBOURNE
WHERE ALEX, A 13-YEAR-OLD
BORN INTO A GIRL'S BODY,
WANTED TO BECOME A BOY.
A TEENAGE GIRL HAS
BECOME THE FIRST CHILD
IN AUSTRALIA TO BE
GIVEN LEGAL APPROVAL
FOR A SEX CHANGE ON
PSYCHIATRIC GROUNDS.
THE TEENAGER, KNOWN ONLY
AS "ALEX", WILL BE ALLOWED
TO START IRREVERSIBLE
HORMONE TREATMENT
WHEN SHE TURNS 16.
BUT THE COURT DECISION HAS
DIVIDED MEDICAL AUTHORITIES.
ALEX WAS A VERY DISTRESSED
ADOLESCENT WHO WAS
EXTREMELY DEPRESSED BECAUSE
OF HIS GENDER DYSPHORIA,
WAS QUITE SUICIDAL, AND
CERTAINLY EVIDENCE SUGGESTS
THAT HE IS MUCH HAPPIER NOW
HAVING COMMENCED TREATMENT.
THE COURT DECIDED THE
TEENAGER COULD TAKE
THE CHOSEN NAME OF
"ALEX" AND SHOULD BE
REFERRED TO AS A MALE.
IT ALSO AGREED TO THE
CONTRACEPTIVE PILL
TO SUPPRESS MENSTRUATION.
ESSENTIALLY I
THINK WE SAW
A VERY CONSERVATIVE
JUDGMENT.
THIS WAS A COMPLEX ISSUE.
THIS IS A YOUNG
PERSON ALREADY LIVING
IN A MALE ROLE.
I THINK WHAT WAS VERY
POSITIVE ABOUT IT IS THAT
IT RESPECTED THE YOUNG
PERSON'S DECISION TO DO THAT
AND SUPPORTED THAT CHOICE
WHICH HAD ALREADY BEEN MADE.
IN TERMS OF BIOLOGICAL
INTERVENTIONS,
IT WAS A VERY
CONSERVATIVE APPROACH,
USING ONLY REVERSIBLE
INTERVENTIONS.
AT 16, TESTOSTERONE
WILL BE CONSIDERED
TO BEGIN HIS
PHYSICAL TRANSITION.
THE COURT FOUND THE
TEENAGER'S DESIRE
TO BE MALE WAS MOST
LIKELY DUE TO BIOLOGY
AND PSYCHOSOCIAL FACTORS.
THE JUDGE REFERRED TO THE
EXPERT MEDICAL EVIDENCE
IN KEVIN'S CASE.
NOBODY CHOOSES TO GO
THROUGH THIS ROUTE.
IT'S NOT SOMETHING YOU
WOULD CHOOSE FOR YOURSELF
OR YOU'D WISH ON YOUR WORST
ENEMY TYPE OF ATTITUDE.
IT'S NOT A WALK IN THE PARK,
IT'S NOT SIMPLE OR EASY,
AND IT INVOLVES A LOT
OF MEDICAL INTERVENTION.
TELL ME WHAT THE GOOD THINGS
ABOUT BEING A GIRL ARE.
WHAT DO YOU LIKE
ABOUT BEING A GIRL?
DR. LOUISE NEWMAN
SPECIALIZES IN CHILD
AND ADOLESCENT
GENDER ISSUES.
SHE CURRENTLY HAS
FOUR ADOLESCENTS
WANTING TREATMENT
TO CHANGE GENDER.
TO DO SO, THEY WILL
HAVE TO GET PERMISSION
FROM THE FAMILY COURT.
A 13-YEAR-OLD WHO SAYS
SHE IS A GIRL BORN INTO A
BOY'S BODY RECENTLY WENT
BEFORE THE FAMILY COURT
IN NEW SOUTH WALES SEEKING
THE FIRST STAGE OF TREATMENT.
IN THIS CASE WE'RE SEEKING
TO USE PUBERTY-BLOCKING
HORMONES WHICH WILL
DELAY PUBERTAL CHANGE
IN THIS YOUNG PERSON
ON THE GROUNDS THAT
THEY'LL BE DISTRESSED BY
THAT AND PROBABLY NOT ABLE
TO TOLERATE THAT, AND THAT
IT'S VERY CLEAR FOR THEM
THAT THOSE CHANGES ARE NOT
GOING TO BE ACCEPTABLE.
LAWYER RACHAEL WALLBANK
PRESENTED MEDICAL EVIDENCE
IN COURT THAT
PUBERTY-BLOCKERS WERE
REVERSIBLE AND COULD SAVE
THE CHILD FROM SELF-HARM
OR, WORSE, SUICIDE.
NOT EVERYONE AGREES
WITH THE VIEW THAT
ADOLESCENTS SHOULD
RECEIVE PUBERTY-BLOCKERS
FOR THIS CONDITION.
MANY RELIGIOUS
ORGANIZATIONS ARE OPPOSED
TO ANY FORM OF
MEDICAL INTERVENTION,
AND SOME DOCTORS
QUESTION THE
LONG-TERM EFFECTS
OF PUBERTY-BLOCKERS.
I DON'T THINK WE REALLY
KNOW THE LONG-TERM EFFECTS
ON BONE DENSITY OF MISSING
OUT ON A COUPLE OF YEARS
OF THE ACCUMULATION
OF BONE DENSITY.
ALL THE MEDICAL EVIDENCE,
ALL THE LIVED EXPERIENCE OF
PEOPLE WITH TRANSSEXUALISM,
LIKE MYSELF, HOWEVER,
AND ALL OF THE
POST-TREATMENT STUDIES
OF CHILDREN
INDICATE THAT THE EARLIER
THE CHILDREN WITH
TRANSSEXUALISM RECEIVE
THIS TREATMENT THE
BETTER THEIR LIVES ARE,
THE HAPPIER THEY ARE,
AND THE MORE THEY CAN
ACTUALLY LIVE OUT A USEFUL
AND FULFILLING LIFE.
WHAT ABOUT THE CRITICS WHO
SAY "ADOLESCENCE IS A TIME
OF TURMOIL ANYWAY, THEY
COULD GROW OUT OF IT,
THEY COULD CHANGE
THEIR MIND,
THEY COULD IN FACT
SIMPLY BE GAY."
WHAT DO YOU SAY
TO THOSE CRITICS?
THE TREATMENT OF
TRANSSEXUALISM IN
CHILDHOOD IS A VERY
CONSERVATIVE PROCESS.
USUALLY YEARS GO BY WITH THE
CHILD UNDER THE MICROSCOPE
BEFORE THE CHILD'S
EVEN ABLE TO COMMENCE
ON THE TOTALLY REVERSIBLE
STAGE ONE TREATMENT.
WHAT I SAY TO
THOSE PEOPLE IS,
"PLEASE KEEP AN
OPEN MIND HERE.
IT'S NOT WITHIN
YOUR EXPERIENCE.
TRANSSEXUALISM IS NOT
WITHIN YOUR EXPERIENCE.
IT'S WITHIN MINE.
IT'S WITHIN THE EXPERIENCE
OF THESE CHILDREN.
IF THEY DON'T HAVE
THE TREATMENT,
THEY'RE FACED WITH YEARS
AND YEARS OF AGONY."
PROFESSOR GARRY WARNE
RECENTLY RETURNED FROM
A LONDON WORKSHOP LOOKING
AT THE MEDICAL MANAGEMENT
OF TRANSSEXUAL CHILDREN.
ADVOCATES ARGUE THAT
PUBERTY-BLOCKERS
MUST BE GIVEN TO A
CHILD BY 12 OR 13,
BEFORE PUBERTY ARRIVES.
BUT PROFESSOR WARNE
AND SOME OTHER DOCTORS
BELIEVE THEY SHOULDN'T
BE ADMINISTERED
TO ANY CHILD UNDER
THE AGE OF 16.
THEY'RE WORRIED ABOUT
MAKING THE WRONG DECISION
AND THEY'RE WORRIED
ABOUT IT COMING BACK
TO BITE THEM LATER ON.
AND CAN THAT HAPPEN?
IT HAS HAPPENED.
AT WHAT AGE SHOULD A YOUNG
PERSON BE ABLE TO TAKE
THINGS LIKE HORMONES,
FOR EXAMPLE?
IT'S A DILEMMA BECAUSE
YOUNG PEOPLE - IT'S A
DILEMMA BECAUSE YOU'RE
WONDERING ALL THE TIME
WHETHER THE YOUNG PERSON
HAS A CORE GENDER
OF THE SEX THEY IDENTIFY
THEMSELVES TO BE,
OR WHETHER THEY'VE
ACTUALLY GOT ENOUGH
LIFE EXPERIENCE TO
MAKE THAT JUDGMENT.
CRAIG ANDREWS RUNS
A SUPPORT GROUP
FOR FEMALE-TO-MALE
TRANSSEXUALS.
HE'S BEEN CONCERNED ABOUT
THE INCREASING NUMBER OF
TEENAGE GIRLS CONTACTING
HIS ORGANIZATION
WANTING TREATMENT
BECAUSE THEY THINK
THEIR LIVES WOULD
BE BETTER AS MEN.
I THINK YOUNG PEOPLE, FOR
A WHOLE RANGE OF REASONS,
CAN GRAB HOLD OF ANSWERS
THAT MIGHT NOT BE ANSWERS.
THREE WEEKS AGO, RACHAEL
WALLBANK'S CLIENT RECEIVED
PERMISSION TO HAVE THEIR
13-YEAR-OLD CHILD TREATED
WITH PUBERTY-BLOCKING
HORMONES.
THE LAWYER WILL
SOON RETURN TO COURT
SEEKING AN ORDER SO THE
PARENTS DON'T HAVE TO
GO THROUGH THE FAMILY
COURT TO ACCESS FURTHER
MEDICAL TREATMENT FOR
THEIR TRANSSEXUAL CHILD.
THE NEXT STAGE WOULD
INCLUDE ESTROGEN
TO FEMINIZE THE TEENAGER.
RACHAEL WALLBANK SAYS, IF
SUCCESSFUL, THIS WOULD BE
A PRECEDENT-SETTING
CASE, MAKING IT NO LONGER
MANDATORY FOR CHILDREN TO
GO BEFORE THE FAMILY COURT
FOR TREATMENT.
IN MY VIEW, ONCE A COURT
HEARS MORE COMPLETE
EVIDENCE ABOUT
TRANSSEXUALISM, THE KIND
OF EVIDENCE THAT JUSTICE
CHISHOLM HEARD RE KEVIN,
THEN THE COURT WILL BE
MORE COMFORTABLE ABOUT
ALLOWING THE TREATMENT
OF TRANSSEXUALISM
IN CHILDHOOD TO FOLLOW
A MEDICAL COURSE
RATHER THAN IMPOSING ON THE
PARENTS OF THESE CHILDREN
THE ADDITIONAL BURDEN,
FINANCIAL AND MENTAL BURDEN,
OF HAVING TO TAKE
THE CHILD THROUGH
A LEGAL PROCESS TO ENABLE
THAT CHILD TO RECEIVE
THE TREATMENT THAT
THE CHILD NEEDS.
THE QUESTION WHETHER
PROCEDURES RELATING TO
TRANSSEXUALISM REQUIRE
COURT APPROVAL
I CAN WELL IMAGINE
MIGHT BE CONTROVERSIAL,
AND I SUPPOSE THE
ARGUMENT FOR HAVING IT
APPROVED BY A COURT WOULD
BE STRONGER IN THE CASE
OF IRREVERSIBLE
STEPS LIKE SURGERY.
WE THINK THAT THERE
MUST BE SOME COMPROMISE
THAT CAN BE REACHED
HERE WHEREBY THE COURT
PERHAPS AGREES TO
CERTAIN GUIDELINES.
AS SCIENCE DISCOVERS MORE
ABOUT WHAT MAKES A BOY
AND WHAT MAKES A GIRL,
THESE DIFFICULT DECISIONS
MAY BE MADE A
LITTLE EASIER.
BUT FOR NOW WE ARE
ONLY JUST STARTING
TO UNDERSTAND HOW COMPLEX
THE BIOLOGY IS.
IT CERTAINLY ISN'T AS
SIMPLE AS XX AND XY.